>> REGINA MEREDITH: Most of the
pain in our lives is the result
of the interpretation of
past events that became stuck
as a truth.
Once the pattern is
entrenched, there's
little we seem to be
able to do to shift
that hurtful perception, so it
haunts us throughout our lives.
But what if you could reframe
your entire life story?
NLP, short for
Neuro-linguistic Programming,
has been doing this for
hundreds of thousands of people.
Tom Dotz is here to
explain some of the secrets
to unlocking painful
perceptions and releasing them
from our psyche, which I
don't know a single person
on this planet that
doesn't need to do that
at some level or another.
>> TOM DOTZ: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: Some are just
more skilled at burying them
permanently.
>> DOTZ: Right.
Right.
>> REGINA: Going to
denial, whatever.
But a healthier way to
live is to bring those up
to the surface and
look at them again.
Because, as we're
going to find out,
there's very little
that is objective truth
within our realm of
experience it seems.
>> DOTZ: That's quite correct.
We really live inside
the mental maps or models
that we've built of reality.
It's true right down
to a physical level.
We don't see with our eyes.
We see with our mind.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: This and many other
things are actually being
really validated by the research
that neuroscience has been
doing over the last 10 to 15
years since they discovered
MRIs and FMRI machines.
And it's really interesting
how many of the realizations
and lessons that
we've taught in NLP,
going all the way back to
1974, are being validated
by the work in the
neuroscience area.
>> REGINA: Well, let's talk
about the origins of NLP,
how it came about, what
it was being applied
for in the beginning, and then
move a little bit forward more
toward what's happening now.
>> DOTZ: Sure.
Well, it started
out with a group
of students and a
professor at UC Santa Cruz
back in the mid to early '70s.
And they were lucky
enough to be connected
with a man named
Gregory Bateson, who
was a focal point of a lot
of the new thought that
was being developed at the time.
He was formerly married
to Margaret Mead, one
of the foremost
anthropologists in the world.
He was good friends with both
Milton Erickson, who's probably
the greatest hypnotherapist
who ever lived
and with Virginia Satir,
who was the primary lead
developer of Conjoint
Family Therapy.
And they were also
connected with Fritz Perls.
And so these students were
really interested in how
does it work, like
most of us are
at some point in our
lives or another.
How does it work, meaning
all of this and all of this?
How does it really work?
How do we navigate through it?
And as I said, they
were lucky enough
to be connected with
these really, really
successful people, people who
were really successful, as it
happened, in therapy.
They were all really effective
therapists, far more effective
than almost anyone
alive at that time.
And so what they did was they
studied the behavioral patterns
and the language patterns
that these therapists
used to create amazing changes
in a tremendously short period
of time compared to anything
else that was being done.
And one of the first
things they did was they
studied Milton Erickson's
patterns for resolving phobias.
Now at the time, the only thing
known about curing a phobia
was constant exposure until
you overcame the stimulus.
>> REGINA: Immersion therapy.
>> DOTZ: In a way, yeah.
Terrible.
>> REGINA: Not with
arachnophobia, sorry.
>> DOTZ: Exactly.
What, you're going to put me
in a room full of spiders?
Are you kidding?
That's torture.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: That's torture.
Even if I don't
have arachnophobia,
that's not going to
make me happy at all.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: So they studied the
language patterns he used,
and he could resolve a
phobia in three sessions.
They got it down to 15 minutes,
and no one would believe him.
In fact, a friend of mine once
went to a phobia conference
and demonstrated this in front
of a group of psychologists.
And when he went to
test it, this woman
had a fear of heights.
And at the end of his process,
she said, oh, it's gone.
He said, well, let's test it.
Let's walk up to the
roof of the building.
Are you comfortable
with doing that?
She said, oh sure.
He said, how many of you
would like to go with me
and see this?
None of them went with him.
>> REGINA: Why?
>> DOTZ: They weren't willing
to confront the possibility that
their beliefs--
>> REGINA: That he
could have done this.
Now did he do this with his kind
of classic induction and using
ideomotor response?
>> DOTZ: No.
It's the classic, if you will,
three place disassociation
VAKD disassociation.
>> REGINA: OK.
We'll get into that
in a little bit.
All right.
>> DOTZ: Let's just call it
the classic NLP phobia trauma
process.
>> REGINA: OK.
>> DOTZ: And basically, we talk
people through a scenario where
they are able to remove that
stimulus from the conditioned
response of panic.
So a classic phobia:
see snake, panic, right?
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: So if we can separate
that, we see the snake.
It's over there.
It's no threat to us.
That's a disassociation.
So I'm not in the experience
of feeling it again.
I'm just reliving it, imagining
it, but it's out there.
So that's essentially
the process.
>> REGINA: We will get
into that in a moment,
kind of the sequence of how we
respond to our lives and how
these patterns get stuck
there to begin with.
So now when you start
practicing it-- OK.
First of all, most of us
that have heard of NLP
have heard the
simple thing of when
you're trying to access the
past you look up one way.
When you're trying to move
into the future and creativity,
you look up another way.
That's all most people have
even thought about NLP.
>> DOTZ: Right.
Yeah.
That was one of the
early discoveries
that they used primarily as
a research tool and learning
tool.
And it's been widely
misunderstood.
And in a terrible way,
it's been taught as a way
to tell if someone's
lying or not.
That's the big lie.
>> REGINA: So talk about that.
>> DOTZ: Sure, OK.
>> REGINA: Why did that happen?
Because that's what
stuck out there at large.
>> DOTZ: Here's
how it came about.
So it was observed
that most people
in the American culture-- and
really, specifically, they
were studying college students
at UC Santa Cruz in California,
right?
>> REGINA: They're smoking
a lot of weed in those days.
But go ahead.
>> DOTZ: No doubt.
And experimenting with
many other things.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: It was the '70s.
>> DOTZ: I remember
them, sort of.
And they noticed
that most people,
if you ask them to imagine
something that they hadn't seen
yet, so you're
asking them to create
a visual image in their
mind's eye, most of them
would look up to the right as
they were composing the image
or having it come
into their awareness.
And if you asked
them to imagine,
for instance, well, what color
was the first car that you ever
bought, they'd tend
to look up to the left
to access a visual
image of a past memory.
And more if they noticed
that if people were talking,
and specifically if they were
having internal dialogue,
they'd be looking over this
way to the left at midline.
And if they were
thinking in auditory--
that is talking to themselves
about something that
had a lot of feeling
involved-- they
might be looking down like this.
And what's really
interesting, if you
listen to the language
in our culture,
it reveals a lot of this.
When people are really engaged
in an emotional experience,
they'll be looking
down to the right.
And you can think
of that expression
it's downright solid to me.
It's down right solid.
Downright true.
>> REGINA: Well, did they find
that these patterns were--
the percentages were such
that it had validity?
>> DOTZ: It's cultural
and individual.
>> REGINA: OK.
>> DOTZ: So the only way you
can really tell is to be skilled
enough to ask people enough
questions to determine whether
or not they're going to
look up to the right when
they're constructing
a visual image.
Now here's where it
really gets tricky.
Some people-- and this is,
again, something neuroscience
is validating more and more--
our memories don't really
exist.
We make them up as we're
asked to recall them.
We imagine a memory.
And you can go to my website.
I've got copies and
links to the articles
that neuroscience has validated.
So yeah, a lot of
people, when they
want to remember something--
>> REGINA: You're saying it's
like a reconstruction that
occurs.
>> DOTZ: Yes.
>> REGINA: It's not an actual--
>> DOTZ: I'm not
going back and--
>> REGINA: --memory.
>> DOTZ: --finding a videotape
in my head somewhere, no.
I'm reconstructing
an experience.
Well, a lot of people
naturally do this.
They're going to look up
to the right, because it
may help them construct
a visual image.
And other people happen
to look up to the left
because they can access
them more easily that way.
But it's been greatly
misunderstood as some way
that you can tell if
someone's lying or not.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: And above
and beyond that,
the first time I was told this,
within five minutes I could
make myself look in any
direction at all to see that
white Ford that
I bought in 1964.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: Piece of cake.
>> DOTZ: So if you believe
that's going to enable you
to detect lies--
>> REGINA: OK.
So that's dispelled.
>> DOTZ: Yep.
>> REGINA: OK, good.
We've got that right off.
But the whole notion
that you bring up
that we don't have
memory per se,
as in an absolute
film that accurately
relays what
happened, but instead
we reconstruct, bring in
elements of imagination
and memory and
cobble them together
and that becomes the basis of
our reality, that's important.
>> DOTZ: It is.
And it's really useful
in a lot of ways.
Because you can
reconstruct your memories
to give you more confidence,
to give you more satisfaction
with life, to just generally
feel better about yourself.
I'm not suggesting
that you fool yourself.
But let's take an
experience, for instance.
It was the first time you
went skiing, for instance,
and you didn't really
get a good instructor.
And it was spring
skiing, and it was icy,
and you spent a lot of
time falling on your tail.
That's not the
kind of experience
that you want to
remember as something
that was really
fun and enjoyable.
But you might want
to really remember
that you learned a
lot about how to fall.
And my god, you could fall
all the way down the hill,
and it didn't kill you.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: You know?
So reframing that experience.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
That's, in a sense,
reframing, yeah.
>> REGINA: Because
it's interesting.
I'm thinking if
you had something
that was rather unpleasant,
since the whole thing is sort
of a construct of our
imagination anyway,
why not reconstruct it to
something that was actually
a little kinder and more gentle?
>> DOTZ: Yes.
>> REGINA: You say you
don't want to fool yourself.
You don't want to be delusional.
But at what point can
we actually just say,
you know what?
That memory doesn't work for me,
even if it happened that way.
I want to reframe that.
I'm going to choose
another reality.
>> DOTZ: I think at any point
where you decide I've learned
everything I can out of reliving
that experience the way it was.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DOTZ: It isn't of any
benefit to me or to anybody else
to keep beating myself up
with those bad feelings about
an experience that happened
x number of days, years,
or decades ago.
And so why not just reframe
it and think about, what
did I get positive out of that?
What did I learn
from that that can
help me have more successful
and satisfying experiences
in the future?
There's actually a process
called Change Personal History
that's specifically
developed and patterned
to do that very thing.
It's in the book, of course.
>> REGINA: So the whole notion
that a lot of people say, oh,
I'll never forget, that's
really not very healthy,
to choose to never forget?
>> DOTZ: There's a lot of things
I'm perfectly happy to forget.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: I've learned
everything I can from them.
I don't need to keep
remembering them.
It doesn't do me
or anyone any good
to occupy my head rehearsing
a memory, which is actually
a made-up experience.
>> REGINA: Exactly.
>> DOTZ: To begin with, the
experience we're having right
now, we're not aware of
everything that's going on.
For one thing,
our vision doesn't
see into the infrared
or the ultraviolet.
Our hearing only
captures a certain range.
My dog's captures a
much greater range.
>> REGINA: We get about 5% of
the reality we're sitting in.
>> DOTZ: And furthermore, our
minds-- in NLP, by the way,
we consider this to be
our mind, the whole thing,
our whole neurology.
And NLP, in fact, was
talking about muscle memory
30 years ago, and now
it's become more and more
of a common phrase,
as has reframing.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DOTZ: I don't think you ever
saw reframing used in the media
30, 20 years ago, but
it's pretty common now,
especially when politicians
are talking about how
they're considering an issue.
They're going to frame the
issue in a certain way.
We're going to use compassionate
conservative instead
of just conservative.
So we frame the
discussion that way.
>> REGINA: But when you use
your memory and claim I'll never
forget this, in a negative
way there's a certain amount
of usually kind of
self-righteousness that goes
on with it.
And it's perpetuating a painful
pattern of blame and judgment
into the future.
>> DOTZ: When it's said
with that tonality,
that's generally implied, yeah.
I'll never forget that.
We're usually saying that
in response to a feeling
that someone did
something that injured us.
>> REGINA: And that may have
been misperceived to begin
with.
>> DOTZ: Oh, yeah.
>> REGINA: And I think we've
all had those situations.
>> DOTZ: Of course.
Sometimes we uncover the actual
intent of the other party,
and other times we don't.
You know?
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DOTZ: Sometimes
they were confused.
And in most all cases,
it ain't personal.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: It's not personal
even when you think it is.
>> REGINA: That's right.
>> DOTZ: Even when it's
your significant other,
it may not be personal.
>> REGINA: That's like Don
Miguel Ruiz's book "The Four
Agreements," that
wonderful little book,
so simple and profound.
What is it?
Do not take things personally.
That was one of the
Four Agreements.
Don't take things personally,
because usually it's
another person's drama.
It's another person's
perceptions playing out.
You're caught in the
crossfires of it maybe.
Yeah, we have built
our whole life story
based on taking these
things personally.
>> DOTZ: Sure.
Sure.
And not only is it not personal,
most people the vast majority
of the time they're living
inside of their own heads.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DOTZ: They're not really
aware very much of what's going
on outside them.
One of the jokes
in our field is we
don't have to put
people into a trance
so much as we've got to
bring them out of one.
>> REGINA: Bring them
out of a trance, exactly.
>> DOTZ: So we can
actually have them present.
>> REGINA: Well, toward
the beginning of the book,
one of the things you
say, it's more a matter--
our reality is more a
matter of how we think.
So explain what that means, not
what we think but how we think.
>> DOTZ: The
process of thinking.
So one of the things is
the example we just used.
OK, if I just go
through my day assuming
that nobody's
personally attacking me.
A better way is to say that
behind every behavior is
a positive intent.
Whatever someone is doing,
they have a positive intent.
Now it may not match my positive
intent in the situation.
And there we have an
opportunity, perhaps,
to negotiate.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: Right.
But rather than
thinking, oh, they're
out to get me or they're
out to do me wrong
or whatever the case may be,
boy, the boss is on me again,
and he's just a real
drag, and I don't really
want to-- maybe
the job-- see how
you go off in that direction?
Because the guy was frowning
when you walked in the door.
>> REGINA: And that
can become habitual.
>> DOTZ: Oh, yes, it can,
especially if it happens one
or two days in a row.
Or perhaps you had
another boss like that.
Or perhaps whenever you walked
in the door or your father
walked in the door, he
had a frown on his face.
Or you had a teacher
who would generally
have a sour expression when
the class first started.
>> REGINA: And you're taking
these things, now, personally.
>> DOTZ: Boom, boom, boom.
It's become a chain of
a stimulus response.
>> REGINA: And that's the
next part, stimuli, interpret,
emotion, reaction, right?
>> DOTZ: Mm hmm.
>> REGINA: OK.
So let's talk about
it, that event,
and how we pattern ourselves.
>> DOTZ: Right.
So you see a frown.
You interpret it as I've
done something wrong
or he's mad about something.
And so you have a reaction,
an emotional reaction, fear,
anger, anxiety,
insecurity, or a feeling
of wanting to get back at him.
And then you react.
And this is,
basically, the cycle
that we can describe as the way
people move through the world.
>> REGINA: But those are
assumptions all along the way.
>> DOTZ: Yes.
And what would be a little
more elegant perhaps
when you walk and your boss
has got a frown on their face
to actually-- so
what's going on?
How you doing?-- ask a question.
There's no law against it.
>> REGINA: Don't
assume it's about you.
>> DOTZ: Right.
>> REGINA: Because you're
probably not the center of his
universe.
>> DOTZ: And a
question like that,
you don't want to ask yes or no,
like are you having a bad day?
No.
You want to ask,
what's going on?
You want an open-ended question.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: There's a lot about
the use of language in NLP.
And we've taken
what we think are
the essential bits and
the most usable for anyone
and put them in the book.
Because there's
times when you want
to ask open-ended questions
and times where you don't want
to ask open-ended questions.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: And a lot of times
we find that asking a process
question like how is vastly
more useful than asking why.
If you get why,
you get a reason.
If you ask, how did you
come to that conclusion,
then you can understand
their process.
How did they come
to that conclusion?
Well, you know, I
saw the boss frown,
so I figured once again
he's upset about the numbers
he got yesterday,
and so I'd better
hide and lay low all day, right?
Instead of, oh, no, I'm fine.
Actually, the
numbers weren't bad.
But I just got a
little bit of an upset.
Something I ate for
breakfast is bothering me.
How you doing?
It can be as different as that.
>> REGINA: That's true.
And we're torturing ourselves
with these made-up scenarios
all the time.
>> DOTZ: Right.
>> REGINA: I was going to say
in a little bit I'd like to do
just a little kind of thumbnail
sketch of what a session would
be like, one that you call your
Circle of Excellence so you can
step into this alternate reality
that you create for yourself.
But first, let's talk
a little bit about,
in your terminology, what
is distortion and deletion?
>> DOTZ: So distortion and
deletion is basically what
happens in terms of how our
mind effects our perceptions.
So distortion,
generalization, I see
one example-- and
a generalization
is an example of distortion.
So I see one example of
a snake biting someone,
and they're traumatized, and
they're taken to the hospital.
I'm using a very dramatic
example intentionally.
And I generalize from there
to all snakes are dangerous,
and anyone who gets
too close to a snake
is going to go to the hospital.
So that's a deletion in the
form of a generalization.
>> REGINA: And that's the
beginning of a phobia,
it sounds like,
too in that case.
>> DOTZ: Well, it could
very well be, yeah.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
There's a story on
the site, by the way,
about a woman who
had a phobia of bees.
And the founder of our
organization, Steve Andreas,
took her through the
phobia trauma process.
And this was a lifelong
phobia she'd had.
She was in her 30s at the time.
And he resolved it.
And you could see clearly
in her face the difference.
25 years later, he
came across her again,
and he did a
follow-up interview.
It's never bothered
her in 25 years.
And one of the knocks about
NLP is that it's a quick fix.
Well, a 25-year fix?
I'll take all you got.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
That's a good fix.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: That's
a good quick fix.
>> DOTZ: That's
>> REGINA: So going back
to distortion and deletion,
there's a distortion.
>> DOTZ: So deletion
is real simple.
I can give you some
really simple examples.
I'm listening to somebody
talk, and I'm not
hearing everything they say.
I'm deleting.
And what I respond to is
what actually, not only do
I hear it, but it
enters my consciousness
and I actually hear
the words they said
and not what I think they said.
OK?
In a lot of cases, listening
to people, particularly people
you've been in a
relationship with,
you've known them for a while,
they'll start a sentence,
and you hear what they
said the last time
or maybe the time they said--
>> REGINA: Or you make
an assumption that's what
they're going to say.
>> DOTZ: Right.
>> REGINA: We all do that, yeah.
And in a lot of cases,
we're not listening at all
because we're figuring out
what we're going to say next.
That's the classic, isn't it?
>> REGINA: You know what?
That's what I love about this
job is that that's something
we all tend to do
as human beings.
But doing what I
do for a living,
I cannot afford to jump
ahead and try to complete
someone's sentence in my
mind because I'm thinking
of something or I miss
what they're going to say.
So this is a wonderful--
become a journalist.
>> DOTZ: There you go.
>> REGINA: Do interviews.
>> DOTZ: OK.
Absolutely.
>> REGINA: It's a
wonderful discipline--
>> DOTZ: That's right.
You don't need to study NLP.
>> REGINA: --so that
you can't do that.
>> DOTZ: Get a job as
a journalist and start
interviewing people.
>> REGINA: Exactly.
>> DOTZ: I'll take a page
from your book on that one.
>> REGINA: Exactly.
But I do notice that.
Still in real life, if
I'm familiar with someone
and I'm not doing this directly,
that same propensity is back,
just like with all of us.
>> DOTZ: Oh, sure.
>> REGINA: I say,
oh, that person.
I know what they're
going to say.
They always say it that way.
>> DOTZ: I'm taking
my daughter to school,
and five minutes into the drive
I don't hear another word she
says.
And we get there and she goes,
and so tomorrow'll be OK?
And I'm like--
>> REGINA: Huh?
>> DOTZ: Uhhh.
Oops.
You don't get to do that
very often with your kids
or you lose a lot
of credibility.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
And you're supposed
to know better.
>> DOTZ: That's right.
Oh, well, of course,
my daughter's
34 now, so that was
quite some time ago.
>> REGINA: So we all do it.
So deletion just in summary?
>> DOTZ: Deletion and
distortion, generally speaking,
we're talking about
what you don't observe
because your
attention is internal
or because you're distracted
or because you simply literally
can't hear what they're saying.
But mostly it's
because of biases
that we've picked up through
our personal life history,
so biases towards assuming
that we know what they're
going to say, for
instance, assuming
that all young people are
going to be interested in
is what their
friends have to say
and couldn't possibly be
interested in what I've
got to say, that
politicians are always
going to have one ax to grind
or another depending on what
party they're in, so we don't
have to listen to what they
say, right down to
the level, as I said,
of our physical perceptions.
We can't see into the
infrared or the ultraviolet.
We can't hear above or
below a certain range.
We can't feel more
than a certain amount.
And it's really interesting.
When I was taking an
experimental psychology class,
one of the little things we did
that absolutely blew my mind
was to test how
big of a difference
between the separation
of two points.
And to my utter astonishment--
I couldn't believe it
until I'd done it
about three times--
I could sense a finer
difference with my fingertip
than I could detect
with my eyes.
>> REGINA: Interesting.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: From that field,
the energy in that field.
>> DOTZ: It was simply
had two needles,
and they would be brought
together until you
couldn't feel that
there were two of them.
But when you did the same
thing, take the two needles,
bring them closer together,
you could feel a smaller
difference, like one millimeter.
With my eyes, I
wouldn't be able to see
the difference of
maybe five millimeters.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: But my finger could
detect a difference as small
as one millimeter.
>> REGINA: Interesting that that
field was able to perceive it.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: So really what's
happening is we're going
through life, because
of prejudices, beliefs,
biases of all kinds,
deleting reality,
deleting what's right
in front of us as we go.
We only take in a very,
even smaller bandwidth
than missing the other 95%.
>> DOTZ: Mm hmm.
Yeah.
We build up a series
of generalizations,
and we need to.
We don't want to figure out how
to tie our shoes every time we
put them on.
So we build up generalizations
about how the world works,
our experience, and
how to move through it.
And they're really
efficiency strategies,
but they become misapplied.
We start using them everywhere.
It's like the old story
of if all you've got
is a hammer everything's a nail.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: Right.
So we misuse these by applying
them where they don't belong.
And that's where generalization
can be a real trap
and not hearing what
people are actually saying,
deleting parts of
our experience.
Being in denial about something
is a classic way of phrasing
it.
That's a massive
deletion, if you will.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: And so one of the
things that NLP helps us learn
how to do again is to be aware
of when those generalizations
don't apply and when to
gather more information.
A really big, big
part of NLP is just
the basics of learning how to
gather accurate information so
that we can keep our
navigation system, if you will,
for navigating through
our lives tuned up.
>> REGINA: I would think one
symptom you would see is,
if you've gone into the world
of generalization too far
and preferences, is that your
world has become more and more
and more narrow.
>> DOTZ: Oh, yeah.
>> REGINA: You're experiencing
a very small band of life.
>> DOTZ: Yep.
>> REGINA: You only take this
route to go to the store.
You only buy this
range of foods.
You only like to
hear these ideas
and speak with these people.
And you end up with a
tiny, tiny little world--
>> DOTZ: Yes, exactly.
>> REGINA: --as a function of
all these things you've talked
about.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
You're living a very
small life, and you're not
savoring everything
that's out there.
>> REGINA: And so NLP can help
broaden that back out again
by looking at all these
assumptions and distortions
and deletions.
>> DOTZ: That's right.
And there's a whole
section in there
on language, the Meta Model
section in particular,
that teaches you a
series of questions
you can use to apply
to your own thinking
to break free from some
of those past patterns,
the conditioning you
had from the past,
the stories that were told by
your parents, by your siblings,
by the great wisdom of
your 17-year-old friends
that's still is operating
part of your life.
>> REGINA: Exactly.
>> DOTZ: Yeah, right.
>> REGINA: Right.
OK.
Let's do a little
exercise that you
call the Circle of Excellence.
>> DOTZ: OK.
It's really best to
do this when you've
got some space and standing up.
>> REGINA: Oh, I see.
>> DOTZ: But I'll try--
>> REGINA: Can we just kind
of mentally go through it?
Can you do that just briefly?
>> DOTZ: Let's talk
about excellence,
a state of excellence.
So think of what does a state
of excellence mean to you?
>> REGINA: I think excellence
means to be fully engaged.
>> DOTZ: OK.
Let me suggest this.
Think of a particular
context, something
you have to do consistently.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DOTZ: OK.
Now what would a state of
excellence be in that context?
>> REGINA: To know that you've
been fully engaged and done
your best at that thing.
>> DOTZ: OK.
So fully engaged.
>> REGINA: Mm hmm.
>> DOTZ: So you would
be fully engaged,
and that would be a
state of excellence.
So if you were to imagine
a circle in front of you
right now and that circle
was filled with engagement,
if it had a color,
what color would it be?
>> REGINA: Well, the first color
that came to mind was actually
red, a very motivating color.
>> DOTZ: That's the one.
>> REGINA: Oh, is it?
>> DOTZ: The first one that
comes to mind is the one.
>> REGINA: OK.
Yeah.
>> DOTZ: So just imagine that
this circle is full of red,
and it's engagement.
And you're going to step into
that right now in a moment.
Now if you were stepping
into that right now
and you were standing
in that circle
and the red started
coming up for you
and filling you up from
the toe to the head,
that full sense of engagement--
>> REGINA: Very energizing.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
And now if you were to step out
of that circle for a minute--
and what was that city you
lived in before you moved here?
That's right.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: OK.
So now what other
qualities might really
enhance that state of excellence
for that particular thing
that you have to do frequently?
>> REGINA: I don't know if I'm
not understanding the question.
>> DOTZ: OK.
So engagement is one thing.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: What other emotional
qualities might really enhance
that?
>> REGINA: Enthusiasm.
>> DOTZ: Enthusiasm, yeah.
So let's just imagine
that along with engagement
we have enthusiasm there.
Now what kind of color
might that bring up?
>> REGINA: That brings up
more of a yellow color.
>> DOTZ: All right.
So now imagine that this
circle has a red base
and it has yellow.
And as you step into it,
the red fills you up,
and then the yellow comes up,
filling you up again, too.
>> REGINA: And that brings a
level of joy, that enthusiasm.
>> DOTZ: Isn't that wonderful?
>> REGINA: Mm hmm.
>> DOTZ: Now as you step out and
think about that and you think
in the future to the next time
you actually have to do that,
what will it be like if that
circle is right there and you
step right into it?
>> REGINA: Oh, interesting.
So you create this
little container
or a platform for yourself with
these already charged colors,
emotions, and feelings?
>> DOTZ: Mm hmm.
>> REGINA: Cool.
>> DOTZ: Right.
>> REGINA: And through
repetition, I assume, boom,
it's just like stepping in
and out of a new reality.
>> DOTZ: Sure.
>> REGINA: Very cool.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: It's simple.
>> DOTZ: It's very simple.
That's why I like it,
especially as a demonstration.
It's really simple.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: You can
do this at home.
The write-up's in the book.
It's on my website.
I actually created
a special website
for the book that's linked from
my main website, nlpco.com.
It's eg.nlpco.com,
and you actually
have all the
instructions, and you
can watch demonstrations done
by a friend of mine Tom Best,
who's one of the finest
trainers we ever had.
And that is something,
yeah, it's wonderful.
>> REGINA: I've just
written it down,
so I can go back and play
with this in my head later.
>> DOTZ: Oh, yeah.
You'll enjoy it.
>> REGINA: Yes, I already did.
>> DOTZ: And the wonderful
thing about this circle,
it goes with you everywhere.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: It's
completely portable.
Isn't that great?
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DOTZ: And you don't
need anything but your own
neurology.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: No application needed.
>> REGINA: And it's visceral,
because you're using
highly-charged words, and
you're using colors to support
the words.
>> DOTZ: That's right.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: So cool.
That's what I wanted.
Thank you for doing that.
>> DOTZ: Sure.
>> REGINA: And let's
talk a little bit about--
we all deal with this-- what
representational modalities are
for us.
>> DOTZ: OK.
One of the developers
of NLP was a linguistic.
He was a professor of
linguistics at the University
of California Santa
Cruz named John Grinder.
So since he was a
linguist, he liked
to use very, very
sophisticated words
to describe what are fairly
ordinary experiences.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>>DOTZ: So, a representational
modality simply means--
modalities are our senses, okay.
Specifically, we'll freely
limit ourselves to the five
that we really all agree we
have: sight, hearing, smell,
taste, and feeling,
touch in particular.
So representational modality
is simply how do you
prefer to represent
your experience
for a particular context?
So in the context of
this conversation,
if I was to reflect
on it later, I
would reflect on it auditorily.
I'd think about what we said
and how your voice sounded
so that if I was building
up a representation again,
it would be a story.
>> REGINA: Where if I were
thinking about the experience,
it would be a feeling.
How did I feel when
I was doing this?
So would that be a modality?
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: Feeling?
>> DOTZ: So you think about
it, and you have a kinesthetic,
we'd say.
You have a feeling about it.
You think back, wow,
that was really fun.
It was really engaging.
It was enjoyable.
Looking forward to
the next one, right?
Not that I'm dropping a
hint or anything, of course.
>> REGINA: Yeah, there you go.
>> DOTZ: That's what we mean
by representational modalities.
Everybody uses all of them.
We have preferences
in different contexts.
So for instance, if I'm eating a
meal at a wonderful restaurant,
I'm going to really
hope that I'm
in my olfactory and gustatory.
>> REGINA: And gustatory, yeah.
>> DOTZ: Right.
Yeah, my smell and my taste.
And I'm certainly going to
represent it visually too,
because a great meal is usually
a visual delight as well
as an olfactory and
gustatory delight.
And we can also sequence these
to build our experiences,
and we do.
So when we build a
representation or a memory,
we're going to have a
sequence like I saw the menu.
And I said to myself,
well, that combination
of flavors, that ought
to be interesting.
I can just smell the
rosemary in that,
and it really works good
with the turkey, as I recall.
So I'm talking to myself, but I
started with the visual access.
I went to my memory of
a smell, of a fragrance,
and I put it together and
thought of how it would taste.
And now I'm representing
it in what's
called the gustatory
or the taste sense.
And that's a
representational modality,
and that's a series
or a sequence.
And that's how we build our
internal map of reality.
>> REGINA: So it's kind of
interesting to just take
the time to watch your process
of how you're engaging with
life and see what your
principal modalities are, right?
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
Yes.
Although NLP was
really, as I said,
originally developed by modeling
really effective therapists.
And mostly it was taught in the
context of therapy or somebody
working with somebody else.
It's really useful to
apply it to yourself.
Because if you want to
increase your self-awareness,
this is a really
powerful way to do so.
>> REGINA: Well, and
the book is really good.
It says it's an essential guide.
It is an essential
guide, to take a person
through this themselves.
If you don't necessarily
need to or want
to go to a therapist
of some kind,
you give people the tools to
be able to do this themselves--
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: --and have these
recognitions of their own
patterns and so forth.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
We went through the whole
field, and we picked out
what we felt was most
important and most accessible
for people without
having a personal coach
or going to a training.
So you get some amazing tools
in there that you can DIY.
You can do it yourself.
And as I said,
I've got a website
that provides even
more support for that.
And we actually
answer our email.
We respond if people
have questions.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: You know, there
was one thing you talked about
in there, which was an
anchoring event that we've all
experienced.
And you talked
about when you met
the woman who was going
to become your wife.
Oh, that's actually
Tom Hoobyar's story.
>> REGINA: That wasn't yours.
That's Tom's.
I misinterpreted it.
OK.
>> DOTZ: We're both
Tom, just to make it--
>> REGINA: The other Tom.
>> DOTZ: --really clear, right?
Yeah.
>> REGINA: So talk about
Tom's experience and how we--
>> DOTZ: Tom's experience was so
>> REGINA: --all
experience this.
>> DOTZ: --great.
We all do this.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: So he was having
a meal, having a lunch,
I think it was, with Vikki, who
the woman who became his wife.
And it was, I think, the
first or second date.
And as they were
sitting together
and they're having
a really good time
and it's going really nicely,
she'd keep reaching over to him
and touching him on
the arm and saying,
oh, Tom, it was
the funniest thing.
So whenever she was leading
off into a new story,
a new anecdote, she would use
this phrase and touch him.
And that formed what
we call an anchor.
And because it was a combination
of touch, voice tone,
and content, it became
a really powerful one.
And ever since then, for
as long as he was alive,
he would remember that.
And whenever he
was touched there,
it would re-access
those great feelings.
So whenever Vikki touched
him there, not me.
Whenever Vikki would
touch him there,
it would re-access
and re-evoke--
>> REGINA: The freshness of
the new love and everything.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
Now isn't that a
delightful thing?
>> REGINA: It is.
Now is this something we
can program consciously?
>> DOTZ: Oh, yeah.
Of course.
>> REGINA: OK.
So let's talk about a
conscious use of anchoring
something in that we
need for our own benefit
>> DOTZ: OK, sure.
Well, the Circle of
Excellence was an example.
That is an anchoring process.
>> REGINA: Good.
>> DOTZ: And it's considered
a spatial or kinesthetic
anchoring process, because
you're creating two different
spaces, moving back and forth.
And also the best way to
do it is to be standing up
and really imagine that circle
on the floor in front of you.
>> REGINA: And step in it.
>> DOTZ: And step into it.
And then when you've got the
feeling fully, then step out.
Distract yourself for a moment.
It's what we call a
separator state, just
to clearly isolate all
those feelings that you
want to be able to access.
You want them right
in that circle,
and you want it clear
and clean and specific.
So for instance, when I think
about doing my yoga practice
and I set up a
circle of excellence,
I'm thinking that the qualities
I want there are focus,
and I want calmness,
and I want my attention
to be able to shift from the
instructor's words externally
to my own words internally.
So I'll start building those
in there, and then I'll step in
and just feel that fully.
And then I step out and
I think of something else
to distract myself, my phone
number backwards, or whatever.
And then I look again.
Does that draw me forward?
And then what I
do is I'm imagine,
OK, so Wednesday afternoon I'll
be going to my Wednesday yoga
class, and I'm going
to have that circle.
And the color of
it for me is green.
So I'm going to have
my green circle,
and it's going to be right
over my mat, whatever
color my mat may be.
Now I'll probably try
to find a green one,
but whatever color
that mat is, I'll
have my Circle of
Excellence right there.
And so when I step onto that
mat, I'm going to step in
and re-access those states
of focus, relaxation,
and attention.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
That's really amazingly simple--
>> DOTZ: It is.
>> REGINA: --but effective.
>> DOTZ: It's really effective.
I could tell you how
to make it ineffective,
but I'd rather now.
>> REGINA: Yeah, right.
Right.
Well, now in amongst
all of this too,
you say when you're approaching
this subject it really
helps us to have curiosity.
>> DOTZ: Oh, yeah.
>> REGINA: And now a lot of us
lose our curiosity as we fall
into patterns in life.
I mentioned before
when you've narrowed
yourself down this little shoot
where you've become habitual
and the curiosity
starts shutting down.
So let's talk about
why we need curiosity
and how to open
that back up again
for people who've shut
down on themselves.
>> DOTZ: Ah.
Curiosity is really one of the
most powerful learning states
there is.
I'm a real fan of learning,
because otherwise, yeah,
your life is just going
to say where it was.
And I wouldn't want to manage
my life with the absolute level
of knowledge I
had when I was 25.
>> REGINA: With a couple
tools in the box, yeah.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
I'd like to keep
learning, especially
because there is so much
more to learn every day.
And curiosity's a
powerful draw for that.
And it's one of the
things that we can really
use as a resource state
when we get stuck.
So in terms of anchoring, one
of the really useful things
is to set up a sequence of
anchors, which we explain
in the book, and it's basically
what we were starting to do
and did there with the Circle
of Excellence demonstration,
is to set up a
sequence of anchors
so that when a certain
trigger happens,
instead of getting resentful or
angry or scared or insecure--
>> REGINA: Or closing down.
>> DOTZ: --closing
down, going into denial,
you get curious about it.
Oh, really?
>> REGINA: To open up your
attention outside of yourself
for a moment.
>> DOTZ: I wonder
what caused that.
Yeah, exactly.
Curiosity will draw
our attention outward,
and that's a lot
more useful than just
sitting here and being
mired in my own--
>> REGINA: But what's happened
to society at large is
it's become so
kind of egocentric,
in a functional way, that so
often I notice people will not
ask a question
outside of themselves.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
Yeah.
>> REGINA: And this is really--
it's kind of a disturbing
trend.
You'll see a group
of people speaking,
and no one's asking
anyone any questions.
>> DOTZ: Mm hmm.
Yeah.
>> REGINA: It's just waiting for
the one to finish long enough
to cut in, cut in,
cut in, cut in.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: You know what I mean?
That's a conversation I probably
wouldn't have a lot of fun
with.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: People are
playing one-up games.
Or I just want to be able to
make the next clever comment.
I want to just be able to make
the next impressive statement.
I want to--
>> REGINA: But when I
overhear people everywhere,
at the airport, everywhere,
that seems to be the nature
of conversation.
It seems as though our
curiosity has somehow
been dampened our obscured.
I don't quite understand that.
But even just with your
saying those words to say,
hmm, how did that happen?
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: It's an immediate
drawing out of yourself
into the external and outside
world that can be enchanting,
it can be whatever, but
drawing yourself out.
>> DOTZ: Right.
Right.
>> REGINA: So that's why you
say curiosity is such a key
component to this
kind of healing?
>> DOTZ: It helps us get outside
of ourselves and frees us from
being stuck.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DOTZ: It's a very
powerful tool for that.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DOTZ: And I think that's
really the biggest purpose
of NLP is to increase
our personal freedom.
We're all influenced all
the time by our environment,
by the media, by television,
by the internet, by our family,
by our personal history.
And the biggest gain
for me from learning NLP
is being able to increase my
own ability to influence myself,
to be more self-directed.
>> REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
OK.
So now-- there's
another-- I mean,
I have many, many things
I could ask you about,
but they're all
kind of functions
of how you work with it that
can be found in the book.
But one of the things I
would like us to talk about
before we wrap up
our conversation
is the notion of you say
there are few questions we
can ask ourselves
to set up our day.
>> DOTZ: Mm hmm.
>> REGINA: And I like that.
I thought it was very
practical and uplifting.
So can you share that?
>> DOTZ: Well, I
can share my list.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DOTZ: And I really encourage
everybody to create their own.
But the questions I
start to set off my day
are, what's something
new that I'm
going to learn today that
I'm going to really enjoy?
And who might I meet
today that could
be a real source of some
information, knowledge,
or new learning?
And what am I going
to do for myself today
to increase my well-being and
my value to myself and others?
And just three questions.
>> REGINA: And so it's up to
each of us to define what those
three questions are that will
propel us forward in our lives.
>> DOTZ: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: And by
asking that out loud,
what are you doing to yourself
by making that a habit?
>> DOTZ: I'm directing
my attention.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DOTZ: So I'm getting
up in the morning.
I'm getting dressed.
I'm reminding myself of the
three questions I've chosen.
And that's directing
my attention myself
instead of just waiting
for whatever I might first
hear on the television
or in the airport
or whatever it is that
might accidentally come in
and perturb me.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: And if I
accidentally turn on the news,
I'm almost guaranteed to hear
something that'll upset me.
>> REGINA: Right.
So you're setting
your own course
by simply posing three questions
at the beginning of the day.
It's just directing
your attention
and choosing to
direct it yourself.
And that's why I say make
up your own questions.
I don't want to
direct your attention.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DOTZ: I don't want
to be responsible
for your well-being.
I want you to.
I want everyone to be
able to be free enough
to choose to be
responsible in a joyful way
for their well-being.
>> REGINA: So give us an idea of
what some of the advances right
now are-- we only have a
couple minutes left-- in NLP.
Is there some new science,
a new direction it's taking?
>> DOTZ: Well, there's
a couple of things.
One is that neuroscience--
as I've said,
I've been having a lot of
fun just pulling together
the examples of neuroscience
validating what we've
been teaching people
for a long time.
And the area I'm really
interested in working in next
is in health applications.
Because we've been doing
a little bit of work
in that area for a
long time, but there's
a whole lot to be done with
educating our immune system,
for instance.
And that's also being validated.
It's so fascinating.
I've been promoting an allergy
process for a long time.
And I'm right now in
the process of creating
a new instantiation
and an advanced model.
It's going to be instantiated
as a software application
for relieving allergic symptoms.
And we've had amazing
success with it.
And I think my new
version's going
to be even more successful.
And it's also
interesting because just
recently in an article in, I
believe it was the "New York
Times," they said, well,
we're discovering now
that cancer can really
be fought effectively
if you train your immune system.
And I'm sitting here going--
>> REGINA: Interesting.
You've been working on that.
>> DOTZ: --oh, no
kidding, gee, wow.
Somebody finally
got the message.
>> REGINA: And so NLP is a
really effective direct means
of reprogramming that, yes.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: That's exciting.
>> DOTZ: It is.
And you know what?
I can guarantee you there
are no side effects.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DOTZ: It's just not possible.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> DOTZ: Yeah.
>> REGINA: Well, Tom,
the time has zipped by.
>> DOTZ: OK.
>> REGINA: Thank you
so much for joining me.
>> DOTZ: Hey, it's a pleasure.
>> REGINA: And it is.
It's truly essential.
I thought it was a very
user-friendly guide.
>> DOTZ: Oh, thank you.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
And I loved even
our little exercise
of our Circle of
Excellence, and I
am going to go home
and take that with me.
>> DOTZ: Terrific.
Play with it.
Enjoy.
>> REGINA: To take a deeper
look into NLP, Tom has written,
as we said, this very highly
useful and approachable guide
titled "NLP, the
Essential Guide."
You can find the book
through any major bookseller
or their site.
Meanwhile, to connect
with Tom directly
you can go to his
website at nlpco.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.